[MUSIC]
>> Brian Holt: Now we're gonna
do some functional programming.
And in my opinion,
most the stuff that I have shown you so
far is very useful for interviews and
little else for the most part.
It's useful to know because it's useful
to make those trade offs in your head.
But they're actually not really gonna
help you in your day to day programming.
However, this functional programming
stuff I'm about to show you,
does help you every day.
This made me a much better programmer
once I learned how to do this stuff.
Or even if you're doing like
stuff like Mongo DB app reduce,
that's all based on the same
concept that we're doing here.
In fact it's all implemented in
JavaScript too so this will literally
teach you to do map reduce in Mongo DB.
>> Speaker 2: One
quick question on the last-
>> Brian Holt: Sure.
>> Speaker 2: Section from Dan.
He says it looks like you're
hashing the value, not the key.
Should it be the key or the value?
>> Brian Holt: It should definitely
be the key.
Am I not doing that?
Let's go back and look.
>> Brian Holt: Well
to be totally honest with you,
the key is both the key and
the value because we're
doing a collection.
This isn't a map,
this is a collection slash set.
So the key and
the value in this particular case
end up being the same thing.
Good question though.
>> Brian Holt: Okay, so
functional programming.
>> Brian Holt: Functional programming
is a wide, wide idea that I personally
have only scratched the surface of, right.
I mean, if you wanna get
hardcore functional programming,
you really need to get
out of JavaScript and
into something like Haskell or
ML or or something crazy like that.
However, JavaScript does allow for
some functional programming
concepts to kind of bleed in.
So we're gonna focus on a few.
First, we're gonna focus on avoiding side
effects, which we just talked about.
That when you have a function,
we want the function to do one thing and
not modify anything around it.
And we don't want it to
modify parameters either.
So basically, if I give you
the same input 10 billion times,
I wanna get the same
answer 10 billion times.
That's the expectation with
avoiding side effects.
This is really, really nice because
now this function is very testable.
I can rip out this function and
test it as much as I want.
And I can be guaranteed that this
function does what it's supposed to do.
And that if I inserted it in some other
scenario, it's only taking in input and
giving out output, right?
It's not doing anything else.
And so thus, it's very easy to
know what goes on with a function.
So that's why avoiding side
effects is very important.
Second, we're gonna focus on higher order
functions, which is basically the idea
that we're gonna have functions
that apply other functions.
So if you remember back,
we were doing that test method when
we were doing the tree, right.
That's actually a higher order function
that's taking in that test method and
applying it, right.
So now at that point we can pass
in different testing functions and
get the same results, right?
That's a higher order function, that's
taking in one function and applying it.
This will make more sense once we
start talking about the actual
higher order functions that
we are gonna do it with.
And thirdly,
we're gonna be transforming lists of data.
Which is something very,
very common to functional and
eventually reactive programming, that
all you're doing is taking the one list,
doing something to it and
giving you back a new list of transformed
values.
>> Brian Holt: [COUGH] What's really cool
about functional programming is we begin
to describe what we want as opposed to
how we want it to happen.
And I think that's
a really powerful concept,
it's declarative versus
imperative programming.
We're declaring that this is gonna happen,
then this is gonna happen,
then this is gonna happen, and
then this is what I'm gonna get.
As opposed to say step one is this,
step two is this, step three is that.
That's the idea behind functional
programming is that, it's what I
have right here, it's maintainable, it's
composable, and it's easy to reason about.
And I make these different
kind of building blocks, and
the building blocks can be rearranged and
used in different order and
used in different ways and
recompose with each other.
And then I can test each building block
super well, so that I know when I go back
to reach for this other component,
it's already built and
it's already super well tested and it's
just very maintainable and very happy.